[ENH] Allow encoding the fieldmapping intent of the protocol (#622)
bids-standard/bids-specification: src/04-modality-specific-files/01-magnetic-resonance-imaging-data.md

manipulations). See [here](https://lcni.uoregon.edu/kb-articles/kb-0003) and
[here](https://github.com/neurolabusc/dcm_qa/tree/master/In/TotalReadoutTime)

> <sup>3</sup>We use the "FSL definition", i.e, the time between the center of the

Author: this was mentioned again under fieldmaps. I've moved that mention (after applying some improvements to the language) over here for completeness.

| ----------------------------- | --------------------- | ------------------------ | --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| AnatomicalLandmarkCoordinates | RECOMMENDED           | [object][] of [arrays][] | Key:value pairs of any number of additional anatomical landmarks and their coordinates in voxel units (where first voxel has index 0,0,0) relative to the associated anatomical MRI, (e.g. `{"AC": [127,119,149], "PC": [128,93,141], "IH": [131,114,206]}, or {"NAS": [127,213,139], "LPA": [52,113,96], "RPA": [202,113,91]}`). |

> ### Echo-Planar Imaging & B0 field-mapping

Author: this is the core of the proposal

| --------------------------- | --------------------- | ------------------------------------- | --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| B0FieldIdentifier           | OPTIONAL              | [string][]                            | The presence of this key states that this particular 3D or 4D image may be used for fieldmap estimation purposes. The `B0FieldIdentifier` MUST be a unique string within one participant's tree, shared only by the images meant to be used as inputs for the estimation of a particular instance of the *B0 field* estimation.                                                                                                                     |

> | B0FieldSource               | OPTIONAL              | [string][] or [array][] of [string][] | At least one existing `B0FieldIdentifier` defined by other images in the participant's tree. This field states the *B0 field* estimation designated by the `B0FieldIdentifier` that may be used to correct the dataset for distortions caused by B0 inhomogeneities. `B0FieldSource` and `B0FieldIdentifier` are mutually exclusive. When a list of identifiers is given, the estimated fieldmap may be averaged across the different sources.      |

Reviewer: Why use unique identifiers instead of paths to filenames, as in `IntendedFor`? I originally assumed that the identifier also indicated the type of B0 field map, but that doesn't seem to be the case. Does an identifier add anything over the filename?

Author: The key to these identifiers is that they allow the definition of higher-level data constructs.

> Does an identifier add anything over the filename?

See https://github.com/bids-standard/bids-specification/pull/622/files#diff-d668661006216379ab2a5c5ff7061b8aR384 

You could theoretically replace the two identifiers with lists-of-lists:
```
{
  "B0FieldSource": ["phasediff_fmap0", "pepolar_fmap0"]
}
```

But I think that is not:
- Readable
- Easy to encode
- Granular enough: the ID "phasediff_fmap0" defines much better how the estimation of the fieldmap must be done given a subset of the data having that `B0FieldIdentifier` (even more so for the pepolar fieldmap).

Author: Easy to encode as in separating concepts:
- What data should I use to estimate a particular fieldmap? and
- what of the estimated fieldmaps available in this dataset can/should be used to correct this particular image?

the ID creates more clear interface between producers and consumers.

Author: Another plus: IDs/tags are more reliable against missing data.

Reviewer: That makes sense. I can see the utility of identifiers in that case, although I guess one could still use a list of lists to point to filenames. Thank you for the clarification.

Reviewer: Two things I think are worth considering:

1. `B0FieldIdentifier` could be replaced by a column in the scans.tsv file (e.g., `phasediff_fmap0`) with a 0 for scans that aren't part of the group and a 1 for scans that are part of the group. I don't know if anyone else likes this idea, but it allows data providers to define arbitrary sets of files for their own purposes.
2. I don't think `B0FieldIdentifier` and `B0FieldSource` should be mutually exclusive. I'm thinking specifically of HCP style acquisitions, where you get separate runs with opposite encoding directions, so you can apply PEPOLAR-style unwarping to them. In that case the functional scan is part of its own B0 field source (along with the other run with the opposite direction) and it needs to have an identifier to that effect.

fieldmap estimation using the following metadata:

| **Key name**                | **Requirement level** | **Data type**                         | **Description**                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     |
| --------------------------- | --------------------- | ------------------------------------- | ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |

> | B0FieldIdentifier           | OPTIONAL              | [string][]                            | The presence of this key states that this particular 3D or 4D image MAY be used for fieldmap estimation purposes. The `B0FieldIdentifier` MUST be a unique string within one participant's tree, shared only by the images meant to be used as inputs for the estimation of a particular instance of the *B<sub>0</sub> field* estimation. It is RECOMMENDED to derive this identifier from DICOM tags, for example, the *Protocol Name* `(0018,1030)`.             |

Reviewer: Something I forgot in my review- can't one image be a component of _multiple_ field map sets? Should this allow a list of strings? The same goes for `B0FieldSource`.

Author: Currently `B0FieldSource` admits a list of identifiers.

For `B0FieldIdentifier` - I don't think that's a common practice. By cases:

- Phases/phasediff/fieldmap - What would that mean? These are separate acquisitions so, from the workflow perspective, the only thing I would interpret is that the author want me to average them. You can achieve the same result by setting a list of identifiers to average in `B0FieldSource`.
- EPI (blip up/down) - Here it could have some consequence. But is there a reason to do this? Maybe if you want to fish for the best-looking correction exploring all the combinations possible of EPIs + DWI/BOLD/SBREF runs? Would you really need that from the encoder of a BIDS dataset? I can't really think of a use-case, but happy to be corrected.

> | B0FieldSource               | OPTIONAL              | [string][] or [array][] of [string][] | At least one existing `B0FieldIdentifier` defined by other images in the participant's tree. This field states the *B<sub>0</sub> field* estimation designated by the `B0FieldIdentifier` that may be used to correct the dataset for distortions caused by B<sub>0</sub> inhomogeneities. `B0FieldSource` and `B0FieldIdentifier` are mutually exclusive. When a list of identifiers is given, the estimated fieldmap may be averaged across the different sources. |

Author: It is probably not clear in the current specs, but if two files share a `B0FieldIdentifier` that also means they can be corrected with the fieldmap derived from themselves, if that makes any sense (it makes sense, for instance, with EPIs and certain phasediff maps acquired with EPIs). Perhaps this is too implicit in the spec.

For the same reason you proposed to remove the averaging suggestion, it does not mean you can correct these images for distortions with other fieldmaps - that's a tooling decision (although a prior seems to make little sense). This is just to say that, if an image with fieldmapping potential has both "B0FieldSource" and "B0FieldIdentifier" then it is not compliant.

| AnatomicalLandmarkCoordinates | RECOMMENDED           | [object][] of [arrays][] | Key:value pairs of any number of additional anatomical landmarks and their coordinates in voxel units (where first voxel has index 0,0,0) relative to the associated anatomical MRI (for example, `{"AC": [127,119,149], "PC": [128,93,141], "IH": [131,114,206]}`, or `{"NAS": [127,213,139], "LPA": [52,113,96], "RPA": [202,113,91]}`). Each array MUST contain three numeric values corresponding to x, y, and z axis of the coordinate system in that exact order. |

### Echo-Planar Imaging and *B<sub>0</sub>* mapping

Echo-Planar Imaging (EPI) schemes typically used in the acquisition of
diffusion and functional MRI may also be *intended for* estimating the
*B<sub>0</sub>* field nonuniformity inside the scanner (in other words,
*mapping the field*) without the acquisition of additional MRI schemes
such as gradient-recalled echo (GRE) sequences that are stored under the
`fmap/` folder of the BIDS structure.

The modality labels `dwi` (under `dwi/`), `bold`, and `sbref` (under `func/`)

> and any modality under `fmap/` are allowed to encode the MR protocol intent for

Reviewer 2: Should also include `asl` under `perf/`

```JSON
{
  "PhaseEncodingDirection": "j-",
  "TotalReadoutTime": 0.095,

>   "B0FieldSource": ["phasediff_fmap0", "pepolar_fmap0"]

Reviewer: This should be a relative-ish path with the same format as `IntendedFor`, right? Can you replace these with realistic filenames?

Reviewer: I misunderstood this proposal. Never mind!

}
```

> ## Fieldmap data

Author: I have refactored this section, as it clearly had different formatting. Now it should be more consistent with the above, and the coexistence of the new `B0FieldIdentifier` and `IntendedFor` should not flow unnaturally.

In terms of the spec, this is a refactor (i.e., no semantics about how to encode fieldmaps unrelated to `B0FieldIdentifier` should be found)

```JSON
{
  "PhaseEncodingDirection": "j-",
  "TotalReadoutTime": 0.095,
  "B0FieldSource": ["phasediff_fmap0", "pepolar_fmap0"]
}
```

## Fieldmap data

Data acquired to correct for B0 inhomogeneities can come in different forms.
The current version of this standard considers four different scenarios:

 1. [Phase-difference map](#case-1-phase-difference-map-and-at-least-one-magnitude-image)
 1. [Two phase maps](#case-2-two-phase-maps-and-two-magnitude-images)
 1. [Direct *field mapping*](#case-3-direct-field-mapping)
 1. ["*PEpolar*" fieldmaps](#case-4-multiple-phase-encoded-directions-pepolar)

These four different types of field mapping strategies can be encoded

> as described [below](#types-of-fieldmaps), using the following image types:

Author: Moved to #651.

| **Name**         | `suffix`         | **Description**                                                                                                                                                                                                      |
| ---------------- | ---------------- | -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |

> | Magnitude        | magnitude\[1,2\] | Field-mapping MR schemes such as gradient-recalled echo (GRE) generate a Magnitude image to be used for anatomical reference. Requires the existence of Phase, Phase-difference or Fieldmap maps as described below. |

Author: There is a reason for this:

For Magnitude, you can have: `magnitude`, or `magnitude1` and not always mandatory `magnitude2`.

For phases you have to have `phase1` and `phase2` always (and there's no `phase`).

I'll add your suggestion for to remove the "as described below", but I'm not sure of how we should write the magnitude suffix though.

> | Magnitude        | magnitude\[1,2\] | Field-mapping MR schemes such as gradient-recalled echo (GRE) generate a Magnitude image to be used for anatomical reference. Requires the existence of Phase, Phase-difference or Fieldmap maps as described below. |

Author: (actually, moving your suggestion to #651).

| ------------ | --------------------- | ------------------------------------- | ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ |
| IntendedFor  | RECOMMENDED           | [string][] or [array][] of [string][] | Contains one or more filenames with paths relative to the participant subfolder. The path needs to use forward slashes instead of backward slashes. This field is OPTIONAL, and in case the fieldmaps do not correspond to any particular scans it does not have to be filled. |

For example, extending from the previous example of `sub-<label>_fieldmap.json` file:

```JSON
{
  "Units": "rad/s",
  "B0FieldIdentifier": "se_fmap0",
  "IntendedFor": "func/sub-01_task-motor_bold.nii.gz"
}
```

or:

```JSON
{
  "Units": "rad/s",
  "B0FieldIdentifier": "se_fmap0",
  "IntendedFor": [
    "ses-pre/func/sub-01_ses-pre_task-motor_run-1_bold.nii.gz",

>     "ses-post/func/sub-01_ses-post_task-motor_run-1_bold.nii.gz"

Reviewer 3: Just to see that I get this: In this case, there will be two separate files stored in the `fmap` folder, one with `sub-01_ses-pre` and one with `sub-01_ses-post` that are the field map files. What could the full filenames look like in this  case?

Author: hehehe, the PR needs to be much clearer...

So these two files are part of the `IntendedFor` field, which is what we already have in BIDS and says: the NIfTI to which this JSON file is associated is the fieldmap source for correcting these two other `_bold` files.

Author: Maybe the proposal is more readable here: https://bids-specification--622.org.readthedocs.build/en/622/04-modality-specific-files/01-magnetic-resonance-imaging-data.html#expressing-the-mr-protocol-intent-for-fieldmaps

```JSON
{
   "EchoTime1": 0.00600,
   "EchoTime2": 0.00746,

>    "B0FieldIdentifier": "phasediff_fmap0"

Reviewer: I noticed that the example `B0FieldIdentifier` values in this PR are fairly standardized. @oesteban do you want a specific vocabulary to be put in place?

Author: I cannot think of a reason to establish a vocabulary for this. I think giving recommendations could be a possibility (along these lines I suggested somewhere using some DICOM field for inspiration - I should go back to that).

For instance, it could be convenient to avoid identifiers that would not be valid BIDS labels down the line (you can imagine a workflow making this field an entity inside BIDS-Derivatives). And yet, you can just strip disallowed chars out if you were to do that. So perhaps, do not use invalid BIDS-label chars for differentiating ids? E.g., one fieldmap set having `phasediff0` and another fieldmap set with `phasediff_0` (or maybe worse, `phasediff0_`). And still this feels a bit twisted for naming.

| ---------------------- | --------------------- | ------------- | ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| PhaseEncodingDirection | REQUIRED              | [string][]    | See [in-plane spatial encoding](#in-plane-spatial-encoding) table of fields.       |
| TotalReadoutTime       | REQUIRED              | [number][]    | See [in-plane spatial encoding](#in-plane-spatial-encoding) table of fields.       |

For example:

```JSON
{
   "PhaseEncodingDirection": "j-",
   "TotalReadoutTime": 0.095
}
```

As for other EPI sequences, these field mapping sequences may have any of the
[in-plane spatial encoding](#in-plane-spatial-encoding) metadata keys.
However, please note that `PhaseEncodingDirection` and `TotalReadoutTime` keys
are REQUIRED for these field mapping sequences.

### Expressing the MR protocol intent for fieldmaps

#### Using `B0FieldIdentifier` metadata

The general purpose `B0FieldIdentifier` MRI metadata is RECOMMENDED for the
prescription of the B<sub>0</sub> field estimation intent of the original acquisition
protocol.

> This encoding fully overrides the `IntendedFor` approach (see below).
> However, the `IntendedFor` encoding is permitted and RECOMMENDED in combination
> with the `B0FieldIdentifier` to maintain compatibility with outdated software.

Reviewer 4: I think of "override" as more like "replaces", but we're recommending duplication. What about:

```suggestion
`B0FieldIdentifier` and `B0FieldSource` duplicate the capabilities of
the original `IntendedFor` approach while permitting more complex use cases.
It is RECOMMENDED to use both approaches to maintain compatibility with
tools that support older datasets.
```

#### Using `IntendedFor` metadata

Fieldmap data can be linked to the specific scan(s) it was
acquired for by filling the `IntendedFor` field in the corresponding JSON file.

| **Key name** | **Requirement level** | **Data type**                         | **Description**                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                |
| ------------ | --------------------- | ------------------------------------- | ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ |

> | IntendedFor  | RECOMMENDED           | [string][] or [array][] of [string][] | Contains one or more filenames with paths relative to the participant subfolder. The path needs to use forward slashes instead of backward slashes. This field is OPTIONAL, and in case the fieldmaps do not correspond to any particular scans it does not have to be filled. |

Author: Added manually to latest co-authored commit 👍

For example:

```JSON
{
   "IntendedFor": [
   	    "ses-pre/func/sub-01_ses-pre_task-motor_run-1_bold.nii.gz",
        "ses-pre/func/sub-01_ses-pre_task-motor_run-2_bold.nii.gz"

>     ]

Author: (#651)

{
   "PhaseEncodingDirection": "j-",
   "TotalReadoutTime": 0.095,
   "IntendedFor": "func/sub-01_task-motor_bold.nii.gz",

>    "B0FieldIdentifier": "pepolar_fmap0"

Reviewer 5: In link with comment by @tsalo, it seems it used as prefix in this PR the fieldmap type as defined in section Fieldmap data (current line 607), so should not we use of `epi_fmap0` instead of `pepolar_fmap0`?

Author: Sure, the idea for these identifiers is that they must be unique within-subject. There's really no difference between `epi_fmap0` and `pepolar_fmap0`. However `epi_fmap0` could confuse some user that a valid raw suffix is necessary. I'm going to change that in line 692.

-   The OPTIONAL [`acq-<label>`](../99-appendices/09-entities.md#acq) key/value pair corresponds to a custom label
    the user may use to distinguish different set of parameters.

### Expressing the MR protocol intent for fieldmaps

Fieldmaps are typically acquired with the purpose of correcting one or more EPI

> scans under `func/` or `dwi/` for distortions derived from *B<sub>0</sub>*

Reviewer 2: `perf/` here too
